---
title: "Why Elm?"
date: 2019-09-01
categories: code
tags: elm programming
---

**I've been coding full time professionally using [Elm] for more than two years, so now is a good time to express how much it's been awesome to me.**

[Elm] is a functional language that compiles to JavaScript. Yeah, I know I wrote [this piece](/code/2013/why_javascript/) six years ago. I still think JavaScript is a good *execution & distribution platform*, but I changed my mind about it as a programming language with respect to my own aspirations and expectations.

Elm is mainly targeted at frontend development, eg. SPA. You can't (officially) use Elm server-side. While frustrating at first, this focus makes it extremely good at doing just one thing but doing it great.

Elm works with a [compiler], which checks that Elm code you write is not too silly. It works with types, and everything you write has one and only one type. A `String` is forever a `String`. An `Int` is forever an `Int`, a `Yolo` is forever a `Yolo`. Also, all data structures are immutable. That means once they're set, you can't change their value, though you can create new altered version of them. Think of updating immutable data structure in Elm as versioning code with Git.

You can't run Elm code if it's not been compiled, hence verified, first. It's vastly different from eg. JavaScript where it's easy to forget what carries a variable, because it can change at runtime. No mentions of syntax errors. A bonus of using a compiler is that it's much faster to execute than running & refreshing the application to figure out if it works or not.

Nearly everything in Elm is a function. XXX

Also, Elm is *pure*. That means you can't perform side effects from within a function body, and you can't have different results returned by a function while passing it the same arguments twice. That makes code behavior super predictable and simpler to reason about.

Elm doesn't have the strict concept of `null`. Instead, it has the concept of `Maybe`, which combined to types forces you to explicitly handle the presence or absence of a value:

Elm doesn't have *exceptions*. XXX

Elm has pattern matching. XXX

Elm [^1] needs to write less tests. XXX

[^1]: I lied, you can. It's always possible to write & run silly logic if you really want to, in every programming languages available today.


[compiler]: https://github.com/elm/compiler
[Elm]: https://elm-lang.org/
